docs: react 18, streaming SSR, rsc with new apis (#33986)
vercel/next.js: docs/advanced-features/react-18/server-components.md

# React Server Components (Alpha)

Server Components allow us to render React components on the server. This is fundamentally different from server-side rendering where you're pre-generating HTML on the server. With Server Components, there's **zero client-side JavaScript needed,** making page rendering faster. This improves the user experience of your application, pairing the best parts of server-rendering with client-side interactivity.

### Enable React Server Components

To use React Server Components, ensure you have React 18 installed. Then, turn on the `concurrentFeatures` and `serverComponents` options in `next.config.js`:

```jsx
// next.config.js
module.exports = {
  experimental: {
    concurrentFeatures: true,
    serverComponents: true,
  },
}
```

Next, if you already have customized `pages/_document` component, you need to remove the `getInitialProps` static method and the `getServerSideProps` export if there’s any, otherwise it won't work with server components. If no custom Document component is provided, Next.js will fallback to a basic functional document component. Check [next/document support](#next/document) for more details.

> Then, you can start using React Server Components. [See our example](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've made these changes, you can start using React Server Components. [See our example](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo) for more information.
```

> ### Server Components Convention

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Server Components Conventions
```

> To run a component on the server, append `.server.js` to the end of the filename. For example `./pages/home.server.js` is a Server Component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run a component on the server, append `.server.js` to the end of the filename. For example `./components/home.server.js` is a Server Component.
```

(not sure about this)

There’s `./components/avatar.client.js` in the next paragraph.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth mentioning jsx or tsx?

> To run a component on the server, append `.server.js` to the end of the filename. For example `./pages/home.server.js` is a Server Component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run a component on the server, append `.server.js` to the end of the filename. For example, `./pages/home.server.js` will be treated as a Server Component.
```

> For client components, add `.client.js`. For example, `./components/avatar.client.js`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For client components, append `.client.js` to the filename. For example, `./components/avatar.client.js`.
```

> You can then import other server or client components from any server component. Note: a server component **can not** be imported by a client component. Components without "server/client" extensions will be treated as "universal component" and can be used and rendered by both sides, depending on where it is imported. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can then import other server or client components from any server component. Note: a server component **can not** be imported by a client component. Components without "server/client" extensions will be treated as "universal components" and can be used and rendered by both sides, depending on where it is imported. For example:
```

```jsx
// pages/home.server.js

import { Suspense } from 'react'

import Profile from '../components/profile.server'
import Content from '../components/content.client'

export default function Home() {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Welcome to React Server Components</h1>
      <Suspense fallback={'Loading...'}>
        <Profile />
      </Suspense>
      <Content />
    </div>
  )
}
```

> The `<Home>` and `<Profile>` components will always be server-side rendered and streamed to the client, and will not be included by the client runtime. However `<Content>` will still be hydrated on the client-side, like normal React components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `<Home>` and `<Profile>` components will always be server-side rendered and streamed to the client, and will not be included by the client runtime. However, `<Content>` will still be hydrated on the client-side, like normal React components.
```

To see a full example, check out [link to the demo and repository](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo).

> 

Reviewer 2: Out of curiosity, what are the implications of using non-default exports? Will this work the same way?

```ts
import { Profile } from '../components/profile.server'
import { Content } from '../components/content.client'
```

Asking because I know repos using [import/no-default-export](https://github.com/import-js/eslint-plugin-import/blob/main/docs/rules/no-default-export.md) rule everywhere except `pages` directory.

Author: This is not supported so far due to the early implementation but would be great to have

Reviewer 2: I see. What do you think of mentioning this limitation in a quick sentence? Might be a common expectation to have.

> ## **Supported Next.js APIs**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Supported Next.js APIs
```

Could be worth checking header hierarchy too – I saw `###` following `#`

### `next/link` and `next/image`

> You could use `next/link` and `next/image` like before and they will be treated as client components to keep the interaction on client side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use `next/link` and `next/image` like before and they will be treated as client components to keep the interaction on client side.
```

### `next/document`

> If you have custom `_document` To use server components you have to change your `_document` to a functional component like below. Or if you don't have any, Next.js will provide a functional fallback `_document` component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have custom `_document`, you have to change your `_document` to a functional component like below to use server components. Or if you don't have any, Next.js will provide a functional fallback `_document` component.
```

```suggestion
If you have custom `_document`, to use server components you have to change your `_document` to a functional component like below. Or if you don't have any, Next.js will provide a functional fallback `_document` component.
```

```jsx
// pages/_document.js
import { Html, Head, Main, NextScript } from 'next/document'

export default function Document() {
  return (
    <Html>
      <Head />
      <body>
        <Main />
        <NextScript />
      </body>
    </Html>
  )
}
```

### `next/app`

> If you're use `_app.js`, the usage is same with [Custom App](/docs/advanced-features/custom-app).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using `_app.js`, the usage is the same as [Custom App](/docs/advanced-features/custom-app).
```

> If you're use `_app.server.js` as a server component, the signature is changed as below where it only receive the `children` prop as element. You can surly wrap any other client or server components around `children` to customize the layout of your app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using `_app.server.js` as a server component, the signature is changed as below where it only receives the `children` prop as elements. You can wrap any other client or server components around `children` to customize the layout of your app.
```

```js
// pages/_app.server.js
export default function App({ children }) {
  return children
}
```

### Routing

Basic routes with path and queries, dynamic routes are supported as well. If you need to access the router in server components(`.server.js`), They will receive `router` instance as a prop so that you could directly accessing them without using `useRouter()` hook.

```jsx
// pages/index.server.js

> export default function Index({ router }) {

Reviewer 2: How would this look for TS users? Could be worth mentioning a typing to use, which would be some alternative to `NextPage` I guess. Same applies to `App` component (`ServerApp` / `ServerAppProps`?)

Author: Will address this part later. But for custom `_app` it would be simple since it only receive the `children` prop like a basic react component

  // You can access routing information by `router.pathname`, etc.
  return 'hello'
}
```

> ### **Unsupported Next.js APIs**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Unsupported Next.js APIs
```

# React Server Components (Alpha)

> Server Components allow us to render React components on the server. This is fundamentally different from server-side rendering (SSR) where you're pre-generating HTML on the server. With Server Components, there's **zero client-side JavaScript needed,** making page rendering faster. This improves the user experience of your application, pairing the best parts of server-rendering with client-side interactivity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Server Components allow us to render React components on the server. This is fundamentally different from server-side rendering (SSR) where you're pre-generating HTML on the server. With Server Components, there's **zero client-side JavaScript needed**, making page rendering faster. This improves the user experience of your application, pairing the best parts of server-rendering with client-side interactivity.
```

Also, should we be more clear about "zero client-side JavaScript"? Because there are necessary JS that will be shipped such as React's runtime, so technically it's not "zero" and it confuses people ([ref](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo/issues/11#issuecomment-988128075)).

I'll try to rephrase it as

```diff
- With Server Components, there's zero client-side JavaScript needed
+ Server Components won't increase your bundle size and ship zero JavaScript to the client
```

# React Server Components (Alpha)

Server Components allow us to render React components on the server. This is fundamentally different from server-side rendering (SSR) where you're pre-generating HTML on the server. With Server Components, there's **zero client-side JavaScript needed,** making page rendering faster. This improves the user experience of your application, pairing the best parts of server-rendering with client-side interactivity.

### Enable React Server Components

To use React Server Components, ensure you have React 18 installed. Then, turn on the `concurrentFeatures` and `serverComponents` options in `next.config.js`:

```jsx
// next.config.js
module.exports = {
  experimental: {
    concurrentFeatures: true,
    serverComponents: true,
  },
}
```

Next, if you already have a customized `pages/_document` component. If no custom Document component is provided, Next.js will fallback to a basic functional document component. Take a look at [next/document support](#next/document) for more details.

> Once you've made these changes, you can start using React Server Components. [See our example](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've made this change, you can start using React Server Components. [See our example](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo) for more information.
```

> Once you've made this change, you can start using React Server Components. [See our example](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo) for more information.

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/vercel/next.js/pull/34301

For client components, append `.client.js` to the filename. For example, `./components/avatar.client.js`.

You can then import other server or client components from any server component. Note: a server component **can not** be imported by a client component. Components without "server/client" extensions will be treated as "universal components" and can be used and rendered by both sides, depending on where it is imported. For example:

```jsx
// pages/home.server.js

import { Suspense } from 'react'

import Profile from '../components/profile.server'
import Content from '../components/content.client'

export default function Home() {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Welcome to React Server Components</h1>
      <Suspense fallback={'Loading...'}>
        <Profile />
      </Suspense>
      <Content />
    </div>
  )
}
```

The `<Home>` and `<Profile>` components will always be server-side rendered and streamed to the client, and will not be included by the client runtime. However, `<Content>` will still be hydrated on the client-side, like normal React components.

> > Make sure you're using default imports for server and client components. The support of named exports are a work in progress!

Author: ```suggestion
> Make sure you're using default imports for server components (`.server.js`). The support of named exports are a work in progress!
```

> > Notice that make sure you're using default imports for server and client components at the moment. The the support of named exports are working in progress!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Make sure you're using default imports for server and client components. The support of named exports are a work in progress!
```

To see a full example, check out the [vercel/next-rsc-demo demo](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo).

## Supported Next.js APIs

### `next/link` and `next/image`

You can use `next/link` and `next/image` like before and they will be treated as client components to keep the interaction on client side.

### `next/document`

> If you have custom `_document`, you have to change your `_document` to a functional component like below to use server components. Or if you don't have any, Next.js will provide a functional fallback `_document` component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a custom `_document`, you have to change your `_document` to a functional component like below to use server components. If you don't have one, Next.js will provide a functional fallback `_document` component for you.
```

```jsx
// pages/_document.js
import { Html, Head, Main, NextScript } from 'next/document'

export default function Document() {
  return (
    <Html>
      <Head />
      <body>
        <Main />
        <NextScript />
      </body>
    </Html>
  )
}
```

### `next/app`

If you're using `_app.js`, the usage is the same as [Custom App](/docs/advanced-features/custom-app).
If you're using `_app.server.js` as a server component, the signature is changed as below where it only receives the `children` prop as elements. You can wrap any other client or server components around `children` to customize the layout of your app.

```js
// pages/_app.server.js
export default function App({ children }) {
  return children
}
```

### Routing

> Basic routes with path and queries, dynamic routes are supported as well. If you need to access the router in server components(`.server.js`), They will receive `router` instance as a prop so that you could directly accessing them without using `useRouter()` hook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both basic routes with path and queries and dynamic routes are supported. If you need to access the router in server components(`.server.js`), they will receive `router` instance as a prop so that you can directly access them without using the `useRouter()` hook.
```

```jsx
// pages/index.server.js

export default function Index({ router }) {
  // You can access routing information by `router.pathname`, etc.
  return 'hello'
}
```

### Unsupported Next.js APIs

> While RSC and SSR streaming is still in the alpha stage, not all Next.js APIs are supported. The following Next.js APIs have limited functionality within Server Components. Note that React 18 without SSR streaming isn't affected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While RSC and SSR streaming are still in the alpha stage, not all Next.js APIs are supported. The following Next.js APIs have limited functionality within server components. Note that React 18 use without SSR streaming isn't affected.
```

#### React internals

> Most of React hooks such as `useContext`, `useState`, `useReducer`, `useEffect` and `useLayoutEffect` are not supported as of today since Server Components are executed per requests and aren't stateful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most React hooks, such as `useContext`, `useState`, `useReducer`, `useEffect` and `useLayoutEffect`, are not supported as of today since server components are executed per request and aren't stateful.
```

#### Data Fetching & Styling

> Like streaming SSR, styling and data fetching within `Suspense` on server side are not well supported. We're still working on them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like streaming SSR, styling and data fetching within `Suspense` on the server side are not well supported. We're still working on them.
```

# React Server Components (Alpha)

Server Components allow us to render React components on the server. This is fundamentally different from server-side rendering (SSR) where you're pre-generating HTML on the server. With Server Components, there's **zero client-side JavaScript needed,** making page rendering faster. This improves the user experience of your application, pairing the best parts of server-rendering with client-side interactivity.

### Enable React Server Components

> To use React Server Components, ensure you have React 18 installed. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To use React Server Components, ensure you have React 18 installed:
```

```jsx

> npm install next@latest react@rc react-dom@rc

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
npm install next@latest react@rc react-dom@rc
```

```

```jsx
// next.config.js
module.exports = {
  experimental: {
    runtime: 'nodejs',
    serverComponents: true,
  },
}
```

Using `runtime` also enables [Streaming SSR](/docs/advanced-features/react-18/streaming). When setting `runtime` to `'edge'`, the server will be running entirely in the [Edge Runtime](https://nextjs.org/docs/api-reference/edge-runtime).

Now, you can start using React Server Components in Next.js. [See our example](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo) for more information.

### Server Components Conventions

To run a component on the server, append `.server.js` to the end of the filename. For example, `./pages/home.server.js` will be treated as a Server Component.

For client components, append `.client.js` to the filename. For example, `./components/avatar.client.js`.

> You can then import other server or client components from any server component. Note: a server component **can not** be imported by a client component. Components without "server/client" extensions will be treated as "universal components" and can be used and rendered by both sides, depending on where it is imported. For example:

Reviewer 5: React terminology for this is "shared" not universal. Probably makes sense to be consistent?

Reviewer 4: Agreed.

```jsx
// pages/home.server.js

import { Suspense } from 'react'

import Profile from '../components/profile.server'
import Content from '../components/content.client'

export default function Home() {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Welcome to React Server Components</h1>
      <Suspense fallback={'Loading...'}>
        <Profile />
      </Suspense>
      <Content />
    </div>
  )
}
```

The `<Home>` and `<Profile>` components will always be server-side rendered and streamed to the client, and will not be included by the client-side JavaScript. However, `<Content>` will still be hydrated on the client-side, like normal React components.

> Make sure you're using default imports and exports for server components (`.server.js`). The support of named exports are a work in progress!

> To see a full example, check out the [vercel/next-rsc-demo demo](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To see a full example, check out the [hello world example](https://github.com/vercel/next.js/tree/canary/examples/react-server-components) or the larger [vercel/next-rsc-demo demo](https://github.com/vercel/next-rsc-demo).
```

## Supported Next.js APIs

### `next/link` and `next/image`

You can use `next/link` and `next/image` like before and they will be treated as client components to keep the interaction on client side.

### `next/document`

> If you have a custom `_document`, you have to change your `_document` to a functional component like below to use server components. If you don't have one, Next.js will provide a functional fallback `_document` component for you.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you have a custom `_document`, you have to change your `_document` to a functional component like below to use server components. If you don't have one, Next.js will use the default `_document` component for you.
```

```jsx
// pages/_document.js
import { Html, Head, Main, NextScript } from 'next/document'

export default function Document() {
  return (
    <Html>
      <Head />
      <body>
        <Main />
        <NextScript />
      </body>
    </Html>
  )
}
```

### `next/app`

If you're using `_app.js`, the usage is the same as [Custom App](/docs/advanced-features/custom-app).

> If you're using `_app.server.js` as a server component, the signature is changed as below where it only receives the `children` prop as elements. You can wrap any other client or server components around `children` to customize the layout of your app.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you're using `_app.server.js` as a server component, see the example below where it only receives the `children` prop as React elements. You can wrap any other client or server components around `children` to customize the layout of your app.
```

```js
// pages/_app.server.js
export default function App({ children }) {
  return children
}
```

### Routing

Both basic routes with path and queries and dynamic routes are supported. If you need to access the router in server components(`.server.js`), they will receive `router` instance as a prop so that you can directly access them without using the `useRouter()` hook.

```jsx
// pages/index.server.js

export default function Index({ router }) {
  // You can access routing information by `router.pathname`, etc.
  return 'hello'
}
```

### Unsupported Next.js APIs

> While RSC and SSR streaming are still in the alpha stage, not all Next.js APIs are supported. The following Next.js APIs have limited functionality within server components. Note that React 18 use without SSR streaming isn't affected.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While RSC and SSR streaming are still in the alpha stage, not all Next.js APIs are supported. The following Next.js APIs have limited functionality within Server Components. React 18 use without SSR streaming is not affected.
```

#### React internals

Most React hooks, such as `useContext`, `useState`, `useReducer`, `useEffect` and `useLayoutEffect`, are not supported as of today since server components are executed per request and aren't stateful.

#### Data Fetching & Styling

Like streaming SSR, styling and data fetching within `Suspense` on the server side are not well supported. We're still working on them.

Page level exported methods like `getInitialProps`, `getStaticProps` and `getStaticPaths` are not supported.

#### `next/head` and I18n

> We're still working on them!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We are still working on support for these features.
```

### Enable React Server Components

> To use React Server Components, ensure you have React 18 installed. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To use React Server Components, ensure you have React 18 installed:
```
